MEEP - The electromagnetic world

Last time, we looked at OpenFOAM. That was a more general solver for fluid mechanics with other physics added in. This time, we will be looking at MEEP (MIT Electromagnetic Equation Propagation). This software is geared to manage problems that involve electromagnetic forces as the main physics of the problems being solved.

MEEP can manage 1 dimensional, 2 dimensional and full 3 dimensional problems. It uses a technique called FDTD (Finite Difference Time-Domain) to do relatively accurate calculations in a relatively short amount of time. It takes Maxwell's equations and solves them for a fixed volume of space, from one point in time after another. It is also already programmed to be able to run on your laptop, or to be scaled up to using the full capabilities available at ACENET. For all of the scientific Python users out there, there is a framework available that allows you to use it directly from your Python code.

You begin by defining the spatial volume that your simulation is taking place in. This includes the boundary conditions, defining whether the calculations wrap around to the opposite border or get absorbed by the boundary, for example. Once you have that, you can start to define any objects that exist within this space. MEEP includes a library of pre-defined materials that lays out the electric and magnetic properties that you will need in order to make the calculations. You can also define your own specific material properties if needed. Next, you will need to define any sources of electric or magnetic fields. For example, you could define a radio antenna (for an electromagnetic field) or a permanent magnet (for a purely magnetic field). The final step is to define a simulation object. This is how you actually run a simulation, with all of the details needed.

Because you can run MEEP from Python, you can do all of your post-processing, like graphing, directly from the same code. Hopefully, this gives you a little inspiration when you have these types of problems to solve.
